>> Welcome to Building Animated Cocoa User Interfaces.
I'm Deric Horn.
I'm the application technologies evangelist.
And being an evangelist over the last year
we've spoken to thousands of developers
about all of our new Leopard technologies.
And overall, we're getting a really enthusiastic
responses from all of your technologies in Leopard.
And it's really great to see.
But hands down, the technology that more developers are
looking for more than any other has got to be animation.
This is the technology that is really driving developers
to write the next version of their
applications for Leopard only.
So what we've done today is we've broken
animation up into two different sessions.
Today we'll present animation from kind of the view level,
the user interface level.
We'll take Q&A, and then give you about 15
minutes to jockey for seating, get better positions
And then we'll present animation
from the Core Animation engine layer.
How to bring those APIs directly up into your
application and give it that really immersive experience.
We also have coding headstarts for Core Animation.
These coding headstarts can be
found in your WWDC attendee area.
And they include a video, a read-me,
some tutorials, and sample code.
One of the sample codes, for instance, displays
how to use cover flow in your applications.
So before we start talking about animation,
we should really define what animation is.
And to do that, I turn to Mac OS X dictionary.
And it says animation is the state of the
being full of life, vigor, liveliness.
It comes from the Latin term, animare.
Instill with life.
And I think animation really provides the means to
bring the user experience of your applications to life.
It allows you to think about the
way that you portray your data,
the way that you're interacting with
your users, and really change that.
I think as developers, we tend
to use lists and tables a lot.
And this is kind of a paradigm
that works great for developers,
but may not always be the right paradigm for our users.
So at the same time, when you consider adding
animation to your application, don't go too crazy.
Keep things quick, meaningful, and something
that really adds value to your users.
So overall, I wanted to talk a little
bit about the overall architecture.
And when I think about the architecture, the heart
of animation is really the Core Animation engine.
The Core Animation engine really relies on layers.
Now when I think of layers, I think of layers as
these transparencies that sit on top of my screen.
I render my content onto these layers.
I can then move them around.
I can shrink them, grow them.
I can maybe change the Z order by
putting other layers in front of them.
I can even apply these complex matrix transformations
to them to make these layers swirl around the screen.
And we really get great performance out of this,
because we don't have to rerender that content.
Once its rendered on to that layer, we keep it cached.
Now we further improve on that performance by letting
it sit directly on top of OpenGL and taking advantage
of the hardware acceleration that the GL pipeline provides.
And then we further improve on that performance --
because now all the machines that we ship
have at least two processors on them --
so we allow Core Animation to run in its own thread.
And then even to further improve on that,
we rely on the multithread OpenGL layer.
So you can see that we're really trying to eek out
the best performance we can from this whole pipeline.
But at the same time, Core Animation is
also this great graphics unification layer.
And really what I mean by that is now we can start to
render different types of content onto these layers.
We can render QuickTime, OpenGL, Quartz Composer, text,
we can render pictures or controls on these layers,
and we can kind of coalesce them all and flatten
them, so we can have an OpenGL background,
controls in the foreground, or text scrolling above that.
Now in the past, this was pretty difficult to implement.
One way of doing that would have been to create these
child windows -- these invisible child windows --
and stick them all right next to each other.
But then that really meant that we had to add logic
into our codes to keep track of these extra windows.
And now we're giving that all to you for free.
And then what I really think is interesting is we brought
all this power that the Core Animation engine provides
for you, and we brought it right up into the view layer.
And that's what we're really here to
talk about today is adding animation
to existing user interfaces and to your views.
And to do that, I'd like to welcome James
Dempsey on stage.
( Applause )
>> Thank you, James.
>> Thank you, Deric.
Good afternoon.
How's everybody doing this afternoon?
That bad, huh?
( cCheering )
>> That's somewhat better.
Okay. My name is James Dempsey. I am an engineer working on
the Cocoa frameworks, and today we're going to be talking
about building animated Cocoa user interfaces.
So let's get started.
So, we've noticed that over time user interfaces
are becoming much more fluid, much more cinematic.
We saw that going all the way back in the original version
of Mac OS X, with the magnifying doc and the Genie effect,
and all the way up through Leopard, even in bigger
scale with things like Cover Flow and Time Machine.
But we're here talking specifically
about animating Cocoa user interfaces.
And in Cocoa, NSWindows and NSViews are the central
classes that we use for implementing user interfaces.
So we want these wonderful, rich cinematic animation
experiences, and we're using Cocoa with Windows and Views.
So what we've done in Leopard to make it easy for you is
to add a simple flexible API to AppKit for animation.
Now, you may have heard of this thing called
Core Animation, maybe once or twice already.
We have this wonderful, new underlying
graphics technology called Core Animation.
And another thing that we've done in Cocoa
and Leopard is to harness Core Animation
and expose its capabilities and functionalities to NSViews.
So what we're going to talk about today.
The first thing we're going to talk about is how
ridiculously easy it is to animate Windows and Views.
And I use that word very specifically because when you
see the half line of code it takes, that's ridiculous.
The other thing we're going to learn
about is how to create and use views
that are backed by these Core Animation layers.
And we'll get to that, and that
we'll find is a whole line of code.
So with this one-and-a-half lines of code you're
able to take all that underpinning of OpenGL
and then Core Animation built on top of
it, and have that in your application.
And then we have an extraordinary short presentation.
But these will get you all of the
default animations that we have built in.
However, there's a lot more that you can do.
And so we're going to spend the rest of the
time, or a good chunk of the rest of the time,
talking about creating and using custom animations.
So, keyframes following a path, grouping
animations, using Core Image filters, and transitions.
Finally, we're going talk about mixing various content types
in your application, and then we'll do some usage tips.
So we're already, what, a few minutes
into an animation session without a demo.
So I think we need to rectify that immediately.
And so I'm going have Troy Stephens, a coworker
of mine on the Cocoa frameworks team, come up,
and he's going to show a little app called Cocoa Shuffle.
Now, in iTunes, there's a lovely feature called Party
Shuffle, which is kind of this never-ending play list.
And we thought that using the new Cocoa
Scripting Bridge that let's us talk to iTunes,
we would write a small application that more visually
demonstrates what songs are coming up in your shuffle.
So let's take a look, Troy.
So this is showing us essentially what
is currently playing is in the front.
And then what's going on is in the back.
And I think we need some sound.
But that's okay.
It's an animation talk after all.
We can just imagine the sound.
You know, we'll just put it away.
I think everybody believes that
the Foo Fighters know how to sing.
And we'll get back here.
And, of course, we can advance along.
And as we do, the new item pops up on the top.
And we get a new first song.
And let's do it in slow motion.
You can look at the pop at the top.
Because we're going to show you how to do that.
Where it pops in opacity, springs back,
following a path along.
Of course, at this point I was going say, boy, that's
loud Todd -- or Troy -- would you please pause it?
And when we pause, we're able to
use a background filter to blur.
And again, this all being done with standard NSViews.
Those are image views.
This is just an NSView with a box and a text field in it.
And we're adding animation to it.
So let's unpause.
And in fact, we've also added tool tips to each item,
because from the album you might not know exactly what
the song is that's coming up, and contextual menus.
Let's try one of those contextual menus.
There we go.
And again, it's as easy as setting the tool tip
and setting the menu on a standard NSImage view.
Now we might like this pattern, but
we might want another path to follow.
So we added a few presets.
But then we figured, you know what,
sometimes the presets aren't what you want.
You may just want to edit the path yourself.
( Cheering )
>> And so we add a little Bezier path editor in here.
And of course, it's all live, it's
all advancing right from iTunes.
You see it moving in the background there.
And that's a little bit of what
we can do with animation in Cocoa.
Thank you very much, Troy.
( Applause )
>> I would also like to thank Kevin
Perry, our intern who did a lot of work
on that demo over the last week-and-a-half or so.
All right, so we hear a lot about animation.
What I want to do is kind of frame things in terms
of what are the different use case scenarios.
Who are the major players as you're thinking
about adding animation to your Cocoa app.
So we're going to be talking primarily
about things happening in AppKit.
Specifically NSViews and some animation API that we've added.
And then underneath AppKit is this
wonderful graphics framework, Core Animation.
And out of all of Core Animation the things we're
going be talking and referencing today are layers,
as well as animations which help
us define custom animations.
So let's focus first on NSView,
which is not new to the party of Leopard.
We've had it for quite a while.
And NSView provides a lot of functionality.
It has all of the Cocoa controls are NSView
subclass, or NSControl subclasses.
Accessibility support, printing, complex event handling,
dealing with the responder change, drawing the focus rings,
handling full keyboard navigation,
dealing with drag and drop.
We saw tool tips and contextual
menus, cursor reps, tracking reps.
There is a lot of interface that's part of NSView.
A lot of the interactive experience
that you want to maintain.
You want to take advantage of that.
You don't want to write your own text field from scratch.
It doesn't make a lot of sense.
So what we are doing is taking all of these
views and making them animatible.
So the second thing we've added -- or the first
thing we've added in AppKit, is an animation API.
And the first scenario might be just basic common animation.
I have a window.
I need to resize it, and I want that to animate.
I want to move a view from point A to point
B. And to do this we don't necessarily even need
to bring all of Core Animation into the picture.
We can simply use the existing AppKit classes and the
new animation API to have some basic animations occur.
However, scenario 2 would be using
what we call layer-backed views.
We'll talk a little more in a moment.
But again, you're using the AppKit API, but behind the
scenes we've using the power of Core Animation for all
of the drawing, rendering, and animating.
As well, you can continue using those AppKit
animation APIs just as you had in the first scenario.
But now it's bringing all of Core
Animation to bear in the background.
Scenario 3.
Once we've done these default animations,
you may want to do custom animations similar
to what we saw in that Cocoa Shuffle demonstration.
And in this case, you would be using in addition to
the AppKit APIs, you would also be using CAAnimation
and its friends, its subclasses, in the Core
Animation framework to help define those animations.
And there's a fourth scenario.
Which is sometimes you may just want to take one NSView
and then do all of your animating down in Core Animation.
Of these four scenarios, the first three
we'll be talking about in this session.
The next session will be focused a
great deal on the fourth scenario.
Okay. So as we talk about animations --
and let's get to getting things done --
we're going to first talk about some fundamentals.
And then we'll get into custom animations.
So the fundamentals.
In general, animation is fairly straight forward.
Objects have properties.
We change the value of the property, and we
want that object to then change gradually
over time, rather than jumping to the new value.
Now in Cocoa, we have accessor methods we have been
using for quite a long while to set new property values.
So we don't want setFrame to suddenly start moving things
around where developers have not
been expecting that previously.
So we needed a mechanism for setting a new
property value, as well as triggering an animation.
And we use what we call the Animator.
And here's that half a line of code I was talking about.
So Views and Windows have animators, instead of
talking directly to the view or directly to the window
and telling it to set its frame, for instance.
Instead you talk to the Animator
and tell it to set the frame.
That will trigger the animation as well as set
that value in the view that it's a proxy for.
Now these animators are very handy.
You can take one and you can hand it in to any
API that would normally take the original object.
And any message that isn't animated will just
pass it through directly to the viewer window.
So with that half line of code you
can actually get a great deal done.
For all animatible properties, there
are already built-in default animations.
There are linear animations going from one value to another.
They all have a default duration of a
quarter second, so they're nice and snappy.
And by default, they're all grouped
into one event loop cycle.
So in the course of an event you happen
to move or change a few different items,
they won't start and stop at various different times.
They will all be synchronized to the event cycle.
And this is all happening with that half a line of code.
Now you might -- though -- want to change some items.
And one that you may want to change
specifically is the duration.
And we've introduced a new class in
Leopard called the NSAnimationContext.
And essentially, we begin a context or
beginning a grouping and end a grouping.
Anything within there will be performed at the same time.
And we can also use that context to set the duration.
And in fact this is a very handy way to get that
slow motion effect when you hold the shift key down.
So you can wow people with the slow-mo kind of feature.
And we'll show you how to do that
in just a couple of minutes.
So I want to just emphasize that the
Animator and the animation context --
they're general additions to Cocoa for animating.
So regardless of how you're rendering the content,
for the basic geometry of Views and Windows,
as well as the Window's alphaValue, you can use just
Animator and the animation context and get lovely results.
However, we do want to take advantage
of that Core Animation underneath us.
So let's talk a little bit about that.
Core Animation layers are at the core of Core Animation.
They are analogous to views, the rectangular areas.
They have a hierarchy or a tree of sub layers.
They're buffering their context per layer.
We can do all sorts of nice visual effects, like applying
filters, like the blur filter you saw a little earlier,
transitions, shadows, and masking, combining context types.
So we want to use these layer things.
In AppKit, we call using a layer a layer
-- to back a view, a layer-backed view.
So here I have stylized segmented control and an
image view and the little blue is just representing
that they're part of AppKit; they're AppKit views.
And when I'm making a layer-backed view, essentially
what I am doing is literally creating these layers
in the Core Animation context underneath
the Core Animation framework underneath.
And then the content, instead of being
drawn where it typically is for a view,
it is now drawn into the layer and cached there.
And so we call these layer-backed views.
It gives us those per-view content buffering.
In addition, some of the more -- some of the visual effects,
or all of the visual effects of
Core Animation come into play.
So in addition to the content buffering,
we also can apply Core Image effects.
Like here we applied a glass filter to the image.
We changed the alpha value of the segmented control.
And we can apply them and just have
them sit, or we can animate them.
So in this case we're just slowly coming back.
Core Animation gives us asynchronous
animation happening on another thread.
As well as we pick up the ability to do transition
animations when we're switching subviews,
and we can combine different content types.
So there's a lot that we can pick up
from an NSView if it is layer-backed.
So how do we make this happen?
We call this line of code.
[view setWantsLayer: YES];
And it really didn't strike -- I've been working with this
API -- and it really didn't strike me until I was sitting
in the Mac OS X State of the Union yesterday and Bertrand,
and all they're talking about,
you know, going on at the Ope GL layer and
all the work they've been doing down there,
and the work they've been doing in the Core Animation
layer, and all the work that's been going on --
and the full magnitude didn't strike me that there's
all this work going on and for me to get that to happen
with my view hierarchy, I basically have one
line of code where I say, yeah, I want that.
And I was like, that's kind of amazing.
And in fact, if we really don't want to write that one
of code we also do have a check box in InterfaceBuilder.
( Laughter )
>> Which puts us back down to a half line of code.
Great. So as sometimes happens, that
one little flag has big effects.
So what happens when we do that?
Check that off?
A lot's going on underneath even
though we just made a little tweak.
So AppKit is mirroring that entire
view subtree into a tree of layers.
However, from your standpoint as the creator of a view,
-drawRect is still being called when drawing needs to be done.
You still use setNeedsDisplay, and it passes -- does
the appropriate thing in the Core Animation framework
to make sure that that layer that's
backing your view does the right thing.
And view properties are basically as you change them
they're sent down to the layer as layer properties.
And then if there are non-layer properties that we've
made animatible, AppKit will handle that animation.
This last bullet point, rather than trying to explain
it, let's just talk about it, looking at a picture.
So we have a view hierarchy.
And that WantsLayer very much expresses --
not necessarily that your preference is going
to be respected or not respected in this sense
When I say setWantaLayer on any one particular
view, that view and all of its subviews
in the view hierarchy are backed by a layer.
And this is true, then, if say higher up
in the hierarchy somebody wanted a layer.
Then from that point on down the tree.
There it is.
We would see backed by layer.
However, if saying that first view decided,
no, I no longer want to be backed by a layer,
it's already part of a hierarchy that does want a layer.
So it retains its layered backing.
Now another nice addition to InterfaceBuilder
is that when you're looking at the animations tab
for any selected item it will show you the entire
view hierarchy, and it will show you if anywhere
in the view hierarchy in Interface
Builder somebody wants a layer.
And I think that's a very handy feature.
Okay, I wanted to bring up one
other point about layered backing.
Which is that it certainly is wonderful
and extraordinarily powerful.
But if I have a preference paying with check boxes
and stuff and it doesn't usually animate very much,
it can be quite overkill to make
every single thing layer-backed,
because we're caching all of that content, right?
In video memory.
And so it can be a very nice strategy if you have typically
boring views that occasionally do something exciting
and animate, to toggle layer-backed mode.
So turn it on and they all get backed by a layer.
Have the animation occur, change
the animation using the Animator.
And then turn layer-backed mode off.
So that those resources can get reclaimed.
All right.
There we go.
I also wanted to point out that as a -- what's
the word I'm looking for -- as a side effect --
not even a side effect, asa direct result of being
layer-backed, NSViews pick up some new visual properties.
alphaValue, shadow, as well as the
ability to apply content -- excuse me --
Core Image filters to the content as well
as the background in a compositing filter.
In addition, you can set all of
these up in InterfaceBuilder.
Okay. I'm going to bring Troy back up, and
we're going to demo using default animations.
Everybody likes this Shuffle.
Okay. So the first thing we have here, it's a very simple
application, and I believe if this is not available already
as sample code, it should be very shortly after the session.
It's a simple Cocoa application, and we're just going
to first move this NSImageView the
old fashioned way using setFrameOrgin.
And it jumps from spot to spot.
We can even jump it back.
And now let's animate it.
Because that is pretty jumpy.
So take a look at the code.
And in the spot where we do that, moveView,
the imageView setFrameOrigin we're going to --
instead of talking to the view directly, add
that half line of code and talk to the Animator.
Then we'll recompile.
And now we've added animation.
( Applause )
>> Now if we switch to the medium
size, I have different size views here.
And then we'll try large.
Go back to medium.
You'll notice that we're resizing the window as we go.
And we're also, I believe, getting a cross-data effect.
Let's try it with the shift key down.
Ah. We were not getting a cross-fade
effect because we were not wanting a layer.
When you run into a situation where you're not seeing the
animation that you're expecting, because it does happen,
the first thing to check is, is it because I forget to make
myself layer backed? Now that we do want to layer,
we're getting that lovely cross-data effect.
We try it with the shift key so
that we get that slow-mo effect.
And so we saw the line of code that we wanted to layer.
Now let's take a look at the line of code that is both
changing the size of the window and the line of code.
that is doing the switching of views.
So back in Xcode in switchView
Most of the code is just figuring out
what the new and the old view are based
on what was clicked, figuring out the new frame.
But then the core of the code is there.
We begin an ending animation context grouping.
We only need to do this because we want to
implement this shift key slow-mo effect.
We do that in two lines of code
where we check for the shift key.
And if so, we bump the duration up to a second.
And then the core of the work is we tell the contentView
to replace its subview, the old view with the new view.
But instead of talking directly to
the view, we talk to its Animator.
Similarly, when we resize the frame of the
window we don't talk to the window directly.
We just talk to its Animator.
And so in that little method we're able
to get that very common effect that we see
with the animated resize and the subview swapping.
Thank you very much, Troy.
(Applause)
>> So the point -- or a point I would
like to make at this point is that yes,
it's a line of code and half a line of code.
Really, when it comes to building user interfaces in
general, but animated user interfaces in particular,
a lot of the work -- a lot of the time
is spent deciding what you want to do.
And what we're trying to do with the API
is make it such that it's not the API
that is the thing that you have to spend the time on.
It's really working on the usability and
making sure that it's an effect that looks nice
and that people would want to see over and over again.
With this line-and-a-half of code you can get
a tremendous amount done in your application.
However, sometimes we would like to do custom animations.
So let's talk about that a little bit.
So the two things we're going to talk about next are, first,
defining custom animations, and then
how do we set these animations.
We're going to look at a few examples that are kind of
little chunks of the things we've seen already so far.
So defining animations.
We use an expressive set of classes
from the Core Animation framework.
Rather than reinventing a new set
of animation description classes,
we're using the wonderful set that Core Animation has added.
And we'll go through each of these in a moment or two.
But then once we have created an animation,
how do we set it?
And it's a very -- well, I'll tell you.
First, you create the animation.
The next thing we do is add it to a
dictionary, the key in that dictionary is --
or the key in that dictionary is the name of the
property that you want this animation to be triggered for.
So, in this case, if frameOrigin was
set, that animation would be triggered.
And then finally we add that dictionary to the views
and -- we set that dictionary as the views animations.
Now let's take a look at it in code.
Create the animation.
In this case, a basic animation.
Create a dictionary.
In this case, with one animation, one key frameOrigin.
And then set that dictionary on the view or window.
After we've done that, at any point in
the future, somebody talks to that view,
or that view's Animator and sets the frameOrigin.
That key is going to match up with
the key in the dictionary,
find that animation that we have added, and it will
execute that custom animation rather than the default.
We'll see this pattern a lot.
So in dealing with setting up these custom animations,
Core Animation classes -- these are the concrete classes,
or subclasses of CAAnimation that we'll be dealing
with, as well as a MediaTimingFunction to be able
to mix up or change up the timing on things.
BasicAnimation goes from one value to another.
Keyframe.
We can use a path similar to what we did in the Shuffle.
Or we can go from one value to another.
A Group allows us to group a bunch of animations together.
And finally, a Transition as we move
between subviews to define visual effects.
All right.
Let's take a look at a little animation.
And let's take a look at it in slow motion.
This is animation along the path
using a single keyframe animation.
So how do we do this?
We use the CAKeyframeAnimation class.
We create one.
We create a CGPath to describe
the path that will be followed.
We set the path in the animation.
And then we release the path.
I would like to point out that in this case
you'll notice that we're just making an animation.
We're not tying it at the moment to
any particular key or property name.
And then once we create it, we're going to set it.
Again, we make that dictionary.
We hand in that custom animation.
We do it for the key, in this case frameOrigin
And then set it in the animations dictionary on the view.
Then at any point going through the Animator, when that
frameOrigin is set, our custom animation will be triggered.
Now let's look at a more complex one.
That pop animation and there
are two things happening here.
We'll play it in slow-mo.
There's the opacity going from zero to 1, as well as
the size going from zero to larger than the end result,
and then popping back.
So to put this together we end up using an AnimationGroup.
And in this case we're doing a basic animation,
which is the alphaValue going from zero to 1.
And we're doing a KeyframeAnimation that
scales the frame up and then back a little.
Then we're grouping them all together so
that they all happen at the same time.
So that's what's going on with the opacity or the
alphaValue going from zero to 1.
And then more complex is the Keyframe animation,
where we're starting at a particular
rect, we're popping up to a size,
and that's taking 80 percent of the animation.
And then the remaining 20 percent is shrinking back down.
So creating the basic animation is very, very simple.
Create the basic animation. Now
in this case the basic animation
and the keyframe animation are
inside of a bigger animation.
So we need to specify what property
this animation is actually effecting.
So we use animationWithKeyPath.
And this will be effecting the alphaValue.
And then we set the from value and the to value.
The keyframe's a bit longer.
Then we create it.
We can also call setKeyPath to do so after we create it.
We create the values in array of -- in this case
rectangles that we're going to set as the frame.
And by default, those keyframes will happen at
equal times along the period or along the animation.
But we want them to happen slightly different times.
So we will provide a set of times
or an array of times between zero
and 1 that map to the rectangles for the keyframes.
So we've created those two animations.
Now the animation group -- we create the group.
We set the animations.
It's just an array that goes into the group.
And then as we might imagine, we create
the ever-popular animations dictionary.
We set the dictionary.
And now, in this case, we're setting
in the dictionary the key alpha.
Whenever the alpha value of that view happens
to be set, this animation will take place.
The final custom piece we'll look at are transitions.
And this happens when subviews change.
That was a -- a basic, built-in Core Animation transition.
We can also use any of the transitions
that are provided in Core Image.
This is the photocopying transition.
We'll take a look at doing both of those.
It's just loving photocopying, isn't it?
There we go.
So a built-in Core Animation transition.
We make the transition.
And we set its type and subtype.
And those are -- there are a number defining Core Animation.
And then from there it's that same old story.
Put it in the dictionary with the particular key.
In this case subviews.
Set it in the enclosingView, right?
Because it's the one whose subviews are
changing that needs to have this animation set.
And then any time you change the subviews
of that particular view using the Animator,
it's going to use this particular transition.
Now, if we want to use a Core Image transition,
the only difference here is that we use --
we create a Core Image transition
filter and set it how we'd like.
And then when we create the Core
Animation transition animation,
we set the filter, and then do all the same things.
So at least for me the -- what I see
when I'm doing custom animations is
that it is very much deciding what it is you that want to
happen, and then those expressive classes make it very simple
to tweak what's going on and kind
of play with what's going on,
and also just not get in your way.
It's a fairly straight-forward methodology.
Now what if you want to create some
of your own animatible properties?
Before we talk about that I just
want to point out that NSView
and NSWindow do have a lot of
built-in animatible properties.
So it may very well be that the thing you're
thinking you might need to customize already exists.
So keep that in mind.
And then also to really talk about
customize -- or making your own properties,
we need a little bit more formal discussion
of the API that we've added in Leopard.
That Animator that we've been talking to, and
that animations dictionary, the ability to set it
and then retrieve it from a view or a window,
are actually part of another protocol.
The NSAnimatiblePropertyContainer protocol.
Essentially, it's possible to be adopted by any object
that has properties that could be animated.
Now we're familiar with the first three, the Animator.
We've been talking to him the whole time.
Animations, getting and setting them.
That dictionary to define custom animations.
Let's talk about those last two.
And so how are these animations triggered?
You talk to the Animator and then it looks for an animation.
So that animation for key method, you don't call it.
The framework calls it to retrieve the
right animation for a particular key.
And the first thing it will do
is look in a custom animation,
or that animations dictionary if one is set on the object.
If it's not set on the object it will call that classes
+defaultAnimationForKey to try to find an animation.
And in fact, that's how all of the
default framework animations show up.
And so when -animationForKey is called after you've talked
to the Animator, we'll first call that animations method
to get whatever dictionary may have been set.
If none is set or if there's no value in there for
that particular key, it will go on to ask the class
for the default animation for that particular key.
So that said, implementing a custom
property is largely a two-step process.
First, define a custom property.
It needs to be KVC compliant, KVC setter method.
And also important to note that the setter
method should trigger needing display,
or should tell the view that it needs to redisplay itself.
And then second, provide a default animation for that
property by overriding +defaultAnimationForKey.
Now once this is done, you can specify custom animations
and set them for that key in an animations dictionary.
You can treat it pretty much like
any other animatible property.
And AppKit for these properties
will be able to automatically,
with a basic animation, interpret basic scalar types.
So let's look at an example.
Here's the KVC-Compliant setter method.
Important thing to note is the self setNeedsDisplay:
YES, so we can redraw itself as it's animated.
And then overriding +defaultAnimationForKey.
And so all that's happening here is that if the key coming
in is our custom property, we'll
return some default animation.
And again, a basic animation for any scalar type is perfectly fine.
Otherwise, we'll just let the superclass return
whatever the defaultAnimationForKey is.
Okay. Let's talk about mixing content types.
So in the past if you have had, say, an NSOpenGLView
and you've tried to put Cocoa controls as subviews,
that's something that hasn't been directly possible.
We've had to do some workarounds, such as having
child windows as overlays, that sort of thing.
With a layer-backed view we're able to
now mix and match these content types
in a way we've really never been able to do before.
So there are two ways we can go about doing this.
There's an easy approach, which is
that you create the view, an NSView,
set that it wants a layer,
and then create a Core Animation layer
of the appropriate content type.
And then we just say set layer, and
hand in that type for that view.
And then that view will be displaying that
particular layer with that particular content.
But we can also add subviews as we've always done.
However, if we have an NSOpenGLView it's even easier.
We can just create an NSOpenGLView.
Turn on layer backing.
And that's it.
We can then just add sub iews, Cocoa controls, Cocoa
widgets to that OpenGLView as a -- as subviews.
Just like any other view.
And to demonstrate this I would like to bring Troy out.
Okay. So we have here is a rotating earth.
It's an OpenGL, NSOpenGLView.
It is currently not layer-backed.
We have a little checkbox up top.
We can spin it, we can do all sorts of stuff.
But once we make it layer backed, what we've done is we've
animated in an NSBox that is holding Cocoa controls,
and these are subviews of the NSOpenGLView.
They're not a parent or child window,
they're not some other done overlay.
Just a simple item.
And then as we adjust the items -- like, let's do the roll.
Maybe the camera distance a little.
We're effecting that OpenGLView.
I'll turn on the wire frame.
You can't have OpenGL without a wire frame.
Okay. And no wire frame.
And we can also, of course, since these are layer
backed apply a Core Image filter in this case.
We'll do that glass effect.
We seem to like the glass effect.
But, of course, if we get rid of the layers by
hitting that checkbox, go back to the way we were.
Those layers get collected up in
the background, they're gone.
And let's turn them back on because -- there we go.
Thank you, Troy.
( Applause )
>> So the other thing that I actually did want to mention
is that all of the demos, as well as those animation movies,
and hopefully, even Cocoa Shuffle we'd
like to get to you as sample code.
Some of that will be available this week at the show,
and then some of it might take a little
while for us to get it out to you.
But our intent is to get everything you've
seen here out as sample source code.
Now let's just talk -- close up with a few usage tips.
Some behavioral nuances.
Because when we check that little checkbox
we really are rendering the content of a view
in a very different way that we have been in the past.
So there are a few little nuances.
One of which is that setNeedsDisplay -- you want to make
sure that you're very specific about setting needing display
or invalidating portions of your view that actually
need to be invalidated, and not possibly assuming
that because somebody somewhere else in the
view hierarchy above you is invalidating,
that you're going to get automatically
redrawn, even if you haven't asked to be.
So be very specify about your setNeedsDisplay.
Another thing to note is that in layer-backed mode,
when things move from point A to point B as far
as AppKit is concerned, as soon as the animation
starts that item is already at its new location.
It's a visual treatment that it's moving along.
So it's a good idea, one, to turn
off or disable, I should say,
controls as they're moving so that
users don't try to hit them.
Because AppKit thinks they're already here.
And finally, layer content is drawn
axis-aligned essentially into a buffer.
And then that whole buffer is composited in.
So as we rotate stuff that looks very nice, but it's also
the case that some things that you draw might not look pixel
for pixel exactly like the way you
draw -- or how we draw right now.
Some performance tips.
The first is to avoid redrawing.
So things that are not going to change very often, isolate
those so that we can cache them and keep them cached.
And design by compositing.
Applying effects.
Rather than redrawing, sometimes
the Core Image effect can change --
make something look like its state has
changed rather than redrawing the whole thing.
And finally, optimate -- optimize that backing store.
If you're drawing something this big, don't have a
view that's that big and waste a lot of backing store.
So learning more.
There's a good deal of the documentation about this.
Draft documentation for taking
a look at the custom animations.
There's the Core Animation headers.
Of course, the Leopard AppKit Release Notes.
I love the AppKit Release Notes.
And then, of course, the sample code that we will be getting
to you and some of which should be already available.
For more information, of course,
there's the website and Deric Horn.
Some take-home points.
We really do want these wonderful, lavish animated
applications that just have an amazing user experience.
But we don't want you to have to completely
rearchitect all of your user interfaces to do that
What we've done is we've added a small set of
API and the ability to access the vast power
of Core Animation using standard views and controls.
And so we want you to keep designing
those great user interfaces.
Let us help you do so.
And yeah -- we're going to love
seeing what you come up with.
( Applause )
>> And from time to time, in the past they've let me sing.
So in the past we have done little
songs, or
we've done fun songs about model
view controller, modelling man,
the now somewhat obsolete Cocoa memory
management song, Hold Me, Use Me, Release Me.
( Laughter )
>> And well, this year -- we --
well, let's just put it this way.
I guess sometimes in a person's life they get a feeling deep
down that's just so strong that really the only way --
the only way -- you can properly express it
is with an up-tempo country western love song.
( Laughter )
>> And so we'd like to do that for you.
Am I ready?
Yeah. Right now.
( Music )
>> Singing: I love you -- I love view -- thinking
back on all the things that we've been through.
-- sometimes I take for granted
all those many things you do --
so let me take this moment just to say that I love view --
NSView, they say opposites attract
and so I guess it makes some sense --
well, I am not big on parties, but you love handling
events -- I can't draw Tippy the Turtle, no,
nor Pete the Pirate too -- but once you lock
your focus there's no drawing you can't do --
I love view -- I love view
-- and all the subclasses in your retinue -- look it up --
sometimes I take for granted all those many things you do,
let me count the reasons why I say that I love view --
Well, you've got buttons and sliders, split view dividers,
you never sent a rumor in Apple
Insider, handling the drag drops,
printing with the can't stop, tool tips, -isFlipped
makes you do the flip-flop, handling the menus --
-- well, back that up a little bit.
I forget to tell you all a little earlier
that, well, this is a Beta version of the song.
Now, let me tell you, it's feature-complete mind you,
but I won't have the words memorized till October.
( Laughter )
>> Singing: Let's slow this down a little bit.
Well -- you've got buttons and sliders, split view
dividers, you never sent a rumor in Apple Insider,
handling the drag drop, creating like you can't stop, tool
tips this, makes you do the flip-flop, menus in the context,
cursor and tracking rects -- you draw the focus
ring when the user selects, device independence,
responder chain descendants, and accessibility
too -- I love view -- I love view --
it's a simple love, not much hullabaloo --
I once sent a greeting card by Maya Angelou,
the words were mighty flowery, but the gist was I
love view -- well, I don't like to say you're easy,
I regard you with respect, but it's easy to
start drawing, I just implement -drawRect:
And then when something changes I just say -setNeeds
Display:, you record what needs a date and then redraw it
as you may -- well, on that keyboard over yonder there
might be a typing sound -- if you are the first responder,
you'll then message with -keyDown: -- as for handling
a mouse that's been running around your -bounds,
I can build a better mousetrap with -mouseUp, -mouseDragged
-mouseDown -- I love view -- I love view --
that's why I have your API as a tattoo -- you've added
lots of features, 'specially since 10.2 --
I'm running out of places to display that I want you --
well, oh, that Core Animation has a
reputation of turning a head or two --
it's so dang good, stick it under the hood of every
layer-backed NSView -- I love view -- I love view --
let me tell you one thing more just entre new,
I might merge with other classes, but in the end I'm true --
'cause you won't be drawing a damn thing
if you ain't got NSView -- I love view!
( Applause )
>> Thank you, Gordy.fd
Stay up here.
I'm going introduce you -- Gordy!
>> Thanks.
( Applause )
>> Thank you very much.
I also did want to introduce the break points which --
not yet.
This is Gordie Freedman on guitar.
And Victor Alexander on keyboard.
( Applause )
>> I always call him the best slide
advance man in the business.
Thank you.
Now to --
>> That was fantastic, James.
>> Oh, take that down.
>> We'll look for you on iTunes.
>> Do we have time for Q&A?
>> Yeah.
>> Excellent.
>> I think we have about 15 minutes for Q&A.
>> Perfect.
( Laughter )
>> We can do another song.
No, have we rehearsed another song?
Oh dear. Let's do Hold me, Use me, Release me.
( Cheering )
>> Yeah. But we'll do it quick.
Encore. Unless you want some Q&A?
>> Group: No!
>> If you do there is always the
Cocoa Labs Wednesday and Thursday.
( Music )
>> This is in G. Actually, you play, I'll sing.
That's what happened on the first song anyway.
>> Singing: Hold me, use me, then release me --
hold me, use me, then release me -- there we go.
When you play, yeah, go around again.
Yes, we rehearsed this thoroughly.
One more time.
There you go.
-- when you were locking it, you must dispose of this, yes,
and if you should copy, release so your code is not sloppy,
do I have to explain -- if you explicitly retain then
release me, yes, release me, oh release me, oh --
hold me, use me, oh, oh, oh, release me
-- hold me, use me, then release me --
darling, if you don't want me any
more, please, please just let me know.
I've been sitting out here just
waiting, just waiting to hear from you.
We've had some good times, and I want you to know
my accessor methods are wide open for business, baby.
But you know, I understand if you don't need me any more --
if you don't need me any more than just
please, please just send me a message.
A simple message -- a simple message to let me know --
then release me, yes, release me, release me -- oh --
go into one of those middle parts -- if you ==
we'll go around again -- uh, yeah.
Okay, I got it now -- here we go -- yes, if you garbage
collect me, can't be bothered to personally reject me,
send your bookkeeping clerk to do your dirty work, and
release me, yes, release me, oh release me, oh -- Everybody!
Hold me, use me, then release me -- one more time,
hold me, use me, then release -- me -- oh oh oh oh.
That'll work.
Thank you.
( Applause )